Create Post “2024-04-gnomad-v4-1” (#153)
broadinstitute/gnomad-blog: content/posts/2024-04-gnomad-v4-1.md

---
title: gnomAD v4.1
date: 2024-04-19
order: 1
categories:
  - Announcements
  - Release
authors:
  - Katherine Chao
  - Michael Wilson
  - Julia Goodrich
  - gnomAD Production Team
---
We have released gnomAD v4.1, an update to our latest [major release](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/news/2023-11-gnomad-v4-0/). This update fixes the allele number issue in gnomAD v4.0 previously described [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Xm5ZIhmkh7hv2qEfCDS6J2T0IUZYiXP8pNClTlNvCGQ/edit?usp=sharing) and critically adds two new functionalities: joint allele number across **all** called sites in the exomes and genomes and a new flag indicating when the frequencies in the gnomAD exomes and genomes are highly discordant.

> ## Allele numbers across all possible sites

Author: ooh thanks for flagging -- I didn't notice this in the smaller preview

We have leveraged this VDS feature for the first time as part of gnomAD v4.1 and created two new [files](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/downloads#v4-all-sites-allele-number) that contain sample ANs across every called site in the gnomAD exomes and genomes. **This means that for any loci absent from these files, zero gnomAD samples had any kind of genotype call (either reference or alternate) in their sample gVCF.** 

The calculation of AN across all called sites allows us to do two new things:

* Combine exome and genome allele numbers at all sites with gnomAD variation

> * \[Downloads only] Provide AN information for loci that do not have variation observed within gnomAD to date

Author: I wanted to make it very clear upfront that this is only in the downloads (in case users look for these sites in the browser) -- going to keep as is

**On the browser and in the downloadable files**, we now report AN for both data types if the variant was **called** in either data type. In previous gnomAD releases, if a variant was only present in a single data type (i.e., variant present in only the exomes or only the genomes), we only reported AN for that data type. For example, [1-55505582-TC-T](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/variant/1-55505582-TC-T?dataset=gnomad_r2_1) in gnomAD v2.1.1 is present only in the v2.1.1 exomes, and therefore the total AN at this site only contains information from the exomes. This variant maps to [1-55039909-TC-T](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/variant/1-55039909-TC-T?dataset=gnomad_r4) in gnomAD v4.1, where it still has an allele count of only 1 (still present in only a single exome sample). However, the total AN of this variant is now **1,565,390**, which reflects the sum of exome AN (1,413,216) and the previously uncalculated genome AN (152,174).

![Screenshot showing joint AN for a variant with alternate allele counts only from the gnomAD exomes](../images/joint_an.png "Joint allele number")

### Allele number information at non-variant loci

> We have calculated AN information for loci that do not yet have variation observed within gnomAD. This means that even for loci where zero gnomAD samples have a non-reference genotype call, we report the exact AN, or the total number of samples with defined genotype calls at that site, something that users were previously only able to estimate based on coverage data. **Note that we do not display this information on the browser; users will need to download our new [files](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/downloads#v4-all-sites-allele-number) to extract this information.**

Author: good point -- I also realized since you flagged this that I didn't define AN correctly here. I'll make this
```
This means that even for loci where zero gnomAD samples have a non-reference genotype call, we report the exact AN based on the total number of defined sample genotype calls at that site, something that users were previously only able to estimate based on coverage data.
```

<td style="border: solid; border-width: 0px 1px 0px 0px; text-align: center;">22220582</td>

<td style="border: solid; border-width: 0px 1px 0px 0px; text-align: center;">33692158</td>

<td style="border: solid; border-width: 0px 0px 0px 0px; text-align: center;">13239183</td>

<td style="border: solid; border-width: 0px 0px 0px 3px; text-align: center;">69151923</td>

</tr>

<tr style="border: solid; border-width: 0px 0px 0px 0px;"></tr>

</table>

![Figure depicting how exome capture regions impact coverage](../images/blog_post_capture_diagram.jpg "Exome capture diagram")

## Joint (combined) exome + genome frequencies

For the first time, in gnomAD v4.0, we released a combined filtering allele frequency (FAF), integrating variant allele frequencies across the 734,947 exomes and 76,215 genomes. Combining these two datasets gives us the advantage of a larger, more diverse sample set. However, it also introduces challenges related to integrating datasets that not only differ in their sequencing and processing methods, but also exhibit variations in sample composition due to ascertainment biases.

> As part of gnomAD v4.1, we provide users with a warning when a variant has highly discordant frequencies between the gnomAD exomes and genomes. For variants observed in a single inferred genetic ancestry group, we apply [Hail's contingency table test](https://hail.is/docs/0.2/functions/stats.html#hail.expr.functions.contingency_table_test) to allele counts in that group. If all cell counts meet or exceed a minimum of 100 (min_cell_count=100), the chi-squared test is utilized; otherwise, Fisher’s exact test is employed. In cases where the variant is present in multiple genetic ancestry groups, we use the [Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel (CMH) test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cochran%E2%80%93Mantel%E2%80%93Haenszel_statistics) computed by [Hail's implementation](https://hail.is/docs/0.2/functions/stats.html#hail.expr.functions.cochran_mantel_haenszel_test), to compare variant frequencies while accounting for differences driven by inferred genetic ancestry group structure in the datasets. For variants present in both exomes and genomes, we display the contingency table test or CMH p-value and add a warning to variants where the p-value is less than **10^-4^**. We find that at this threshold, ~2.5% (2,230,151 out of 91,177,483) of variants have statistically different frequencies in the two data types.

Author: nice -- will add this and a link to the help page

![Screenshot showing variant with discrepant frequencies flag](../images/discrepant_freq.png "Discrepant frequencies flag")

> The expected number of variants with a p-value of less than or equal to **10^-4^** out of 91 million variants is 9,100. This means that the number of variants we observe at this cutoff is enriched by **~245x** over the number we expect by chance. The p-value distribution (see below) does not show much baseline inflation, so given our massive enrichment at this cutoff, we don’t expect that a large percent of variants are being falsely flagged.

Author: ah I think that (^) was meant to be formatting for the superscript -- I thought that was the formatting that worked for the previous blog post staging but isn't working here

Here are some of the reasons that might lead to the observed differences:

* **Sample set composition**: The exomes and genomes datasets are non-overlapping sample sets and are composed of samples with different genetic ancestries even within the same top-level genetic ancestry group label. Although we try to take this into account by stratifying the CMH by inferred genetic ancestry groups, some of the allele frequency discrepancies might still reflect underlying differences in population genetics that are not fully controlled for in the CMH test. There may be regions or groups of individuals only represented in one of the datasets at present based on different cohorts being included in gnomAD genomes and exome datasets. 
* **Technical explanations**: In most cases, technical differences such as differences in coverage or sequencing technology will equally affect the reference and alternate alleles. However, in some cases, these factors could differentially affect alternate and reference alleles, resulting in AF discrepancies between the two data types.

>   * **Coverage**: Whole-genome sequencing provides more uniform coverage across the entire genome, while exome sequencing focuses on the exons included in the capture targets, resulting in spikier but higher coverage of these specific regions. The exome coverage is highest within the regions directly targeted by capture probes, gradually decreasing towards the boundaries of these target areas, and diminishes significantly as it approaches off-target regions. These differences in coverage can contribute to allele frequency discrepancies between the two data types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * **Coverage**: Whole-genome sequencing provides more uniform coverage across the entire genome, while exome sequencing focuses on the exons within the capture target regions, resulting in uneven but higher coverage of these specific regions. The exome coverage is highest within the regions directly targeted by capture probes, gradually decreasing towards the boundaries of these target areas, and diminishes significantly as it approaches off-target regions. These differences in coverage can contribute to allele frequency discrepancies between the two data types.
```
spikier -> uneven? or inconsistent...I couldnt think of a word, I dont actually like uneven, spikier is correct but feels a bit too casual here.

Author: hmmmm it is a bit casual but feels like the most common term. will leave for now but happy to change if you have strong feelings about it

  * **Sequencing technology and bias**: Sequence context, including genomic location and complexity (e.g., GC-rich regions), can affect both the capture efficiency in exome sequencing and the uniformity of coverage in genome sequencing.

>   * **Technical artifacts**: Single nucleotide variants (SNVs) exhibit different patterns in AF discrepancies than insertions or deletions (indels), as reported in Atkinson *et al*<sup>1</sup>. SNVs tend to have larger AFs in genomes than exomes, and this pattern is not observed in indels<sup>1</sup>. In addition, indels generally tend to have less stable frequency estimates<sup>1</sup>, likely because most of the indels in gnomAD tend to occur in low-complexity regions or in regions overlapping a segmental duplication (see [flags](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/help/what-do-the-flags-on-the-browser-mean)).

Reviewer: These render without newlines between them. Sample Set composition and Technical explanations have a new line in between them which I personally think looks better. Not sure if we want to add new lines  after each reason in the code to make this change, as was done between technical explanations and coverage.?

Author: works for me -- I had to manually add these bullets back in when staging and didn't notice the missing newlines here

<td style="border: solid; border-width: 0px 1px 0px 0px; text-align: center;">22220582</td>

<td style="border: solid; border-width: 0px 1px 0px 0px; text-align: center;">33692158</td>

<td style="border: solid; border-width: 0px 0px 0px 0px; text-align: center;">13239183</td>

<td style="border: solid; border-width: 0px 0px 0px 3px; text-align: center;">69151923</td>

</tr>

<tr style="border: solid; border-width: 0px 0px 0px 0px;"></tr>

</table>

![Figure depicting how exome capture regions impact coverage](../images/blog_post_capture_diagram.jpg "Exome capture diagram")

## Joint (combined) exome + genome frequencies

For the first time, in gnomAD v4.0, we released a combined filtering allele frequency (FAF), integrating variant allele frequencies across the 734,947 exomes and 76,215 genomes. Combining these two datasets gives us the advantage of a larger, more diverse sample set. However, it also introduces challenges related to integrating datasets that not only differ in their sequencing and processing methods, but also exhibit variations in sample composition due to ascertainment biases.

> As part of gnomAD v4.1, we provide users with a warning when a variant has highly discordant frequencies between the gnomAD exomes and genomes. For variants observed in a single inferred genetic ancestry group, we apply [Hail's contingency table test](https://hail.is/docs/0.2/functions/stats.html#hail.expr.functions.contingency_table_test) to allele counts in that group. In cases where the variant is present in multiple genetic ancestry groups, we use the [Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel (CMH) test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cochran%E2%80%93Mantel%E2%80%93Haenszel_statistics) computed by [Hail's implementation](https://hail.is/docs/0.2/functions/stats.html#hail.expr.functions.cochran_mantel_haenszel_test), to compare variant frequencies while accounting for differences driven by inferred genetic ancestry group structure in the datasets. For variants present in both exomes and genomes, we display the contingency table test or CMH p-value and add a warning to variants where the p-value is less than **10<sup>-4</sup>**. We find that at this threshold, ~2.5% (2,230,151 out of 91,177,483) of variants have statistically different frequencies in the two data types. For more information, see our combined frequency [help page](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/help/combined-freq-stats).

Reviewer: This is minor but I think enough of an eye sore to fix, the 10^-4 is split on two lines after my suggestions so this is one suggestion to get it on its own line.
```suggestion
As part of gnomAD v4.1, we provide users with a warning when a variant has highly discordant frequencies between the gnomAD exomes and genomes. For variants observed in a single inferred genetic ancestry group, we apply [Hail's contingency table test](https://hail.is/docs/0.2/functions/stats.html#hail.expr.functions.contingency_table_test) to allele counts in that group. In cases where the variant is present in multiple genetic ancestry groups, we use the [Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel (CMH) test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cochran%E2%80%93Mantel%E2%80%93Haenszel_statistics) computed by [Hail's implementation](https://hail.is/docs/0.2/functions/stats.html#hail.expr.functions.cochran_mantel_haenszel_test), to compare variant frequencies while accounting for differences driven by inferred genetic ancestry group structure in the datasets. For variants present in both exomes and genomes, we display the contingency table test or CMH p-value and add a warning flag to variants where the p-value is less than **10<sup>-4</sup>**. We find that at this threshold, ~2.5% (2,230,151 out of 91,177,483) of variants have statistically different frequencies in the two data types. For more information, see our combined frequency [help page](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/help/combined-freq-stats).
```
<img width="639" alt="Screenshot 2024-04-18 at 3 10 42 PM" src="https://github.com/broadinstitute/gnomad-blog/assets/15892871/9ed909e2-2656-4fbf-a5f7-1852cdbfe100">

Reviewer: The diff is just flag here: "...we display the contingency table test or CMH p-value and add a warning flag to variants..." not sure why github isnt picking up on the single word change
